What is blood pressure?
Blood pressure is the force of your blood pushing against the walls of your arteries. Each time your heart beats, it pumps blood into the arteries. Your blood pressure is highest when your heart beats, pumping the blood. This is called systolic pressure. When your heart is at rest, between beats, your blood pressure falls. This is called diastolic pressure.

Your blood pressure reading uses these two numbers. Usually the systolic number comes before or above the diastolic number. For example, 120/80 means a systolic of 120 and a diastolic of 80.

How is high blood pressure diagnosed?
High blood pressure usually has no symptoms. So the only way to find out if you have it is to get regular blood pressure checks from your health care provider. Your provider will use a gauge, a stethoscope or electronic sensor, and a blood pressure cuff. They will take two or more readings at separate appointments before making a diagnosis.

Blood Pressure Category	Systolic Blood Pressure		Diastolic Blood Pressure
Normal	Less than 120	and	Less than 80
Elevated	120 - 129	and	Less than 80
High Blood Pressure Stage 1	130 - 139	or	80 - 89
High Blood Pressure Stage 2	140 or higher	or	90 or higher
Hypertensive Crisis (dangerously high blood pressure - seek medical care right away)	Higher than 180	and	Higher than 120

For children and teens, the health care provider compares the blood pressure reading to what is normal for other kids who are the same age, height, and sex.

What are the different types of high blood pressure?
There are two main types of high blood pressure:

Primary, or essential, high blood pressure. This is the most common type of high blood pressure. For most people who get this kind of blood pressure, it develops over time as you get older.
Secondary high blood pressure. This is caused by another medical condition or use of certain medicines. It usually gets better after you treat that condition or stop taking the medicines that are causing it.
Why do I need to worry about high blood pressure?
When your blood pressure stays high over time, it causes the heart to pump harder and work overtime, possibly leading to serious health problems such as heart attack, stroke, heart failure, and kidney failure.

What are the treatments for high blood pressure?
Treatments for high blood pressure include heart-healthy lifestyle changes and medicines.

You will work with your provider to come up with a treatment plan. It may include only the lifestyle changes. These changes, such as heart-healthy eating and exercise, can be very effective. But sometimes the changes do not control or lower your high blood pressure. Then you may need to take medicine. There are different types of blood pressure medicines. Some people need to take more than one type.

If your high blood pressure is caused by another medical condition or medicine, treating that condition or stopping the medicine may lower your blood pressure.

NIH: National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute

Start Here
High Blood Pressure (Hypertension) Easy-to-Read (Food and Drug Administration)
Also in Spanish
Top 10 Things to Know about the New AHA/ACC High Blood Pressure Guideline (American Heart Association)
What Is High Blood Pressure? (American Heart Association)
What Is High Blood Pressure? From the National Institutes of Health Video (National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute)
Also in Spanish
Symptoms
9 Surprisingly Subtle Symptoms of High Blood Pressure (National Council on Aging)
Diagnosis and Tests
Aldosterone Test From the National Institutes of Health (National Library of Medicine)
Also in Spanish
Blood Pressure Test (Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research)
Chloride Blood Test From the National Institutes of Health (National Library of Medicine)
Also in Spanish
How to Take Your Blood Pressure at Home (American College of Cardiology) - PDF
Measuring Blood Pressure From the National Institutes of Health (National Library of Medicine)
Also in Spanish
Renin Test From the National Institutes of Health (National Library of Medicine)
Also in Spanish
Prevention and Risk Factors
How to Prevent High Blood Pressure: MedlinePlus Health Topic From the National Institutes of Health (National Library of Medicine)
Also in Spanish
Mind Your Risks From the National Institutes of Health (National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke)
